.. _gui:

===============================
Graphical User Interface (GUI)
===============================

Introduction
============

The Graphical User Interface (GUI) provides a point-and-click experience for
working with Chameleon resources. From the GUI, you may perform tasks such as
manage and launch instances, and configure custom networking. Additionally, you
may download an *OpenStack RC* file from the GUI if you wish to work with the
:ref:`Command Line Interface <cli>`, instead. The Chameleon GUI is built on top
of `OpenStack Horizon <https://docs.openstack.org/horizon/latest/>`_. There are
two Chameleon resource sites, each with its own URL (though it is possible to
easily switch from one to other, see :ref:`gui-project-menu`).

- The Texas Advanced Computing Center resources (CHI\@TACC) are available at:

    https://chi.tacc.chameleoncloud.org

- The University of Chicago resources (CHI\@UC) are available at:

    https://chi.uc.chameleoncloud.org

Chameleon also hosts an *OpenStack KVM* implementation where you may work with
virtual machines. This site **does not** have access to bare metal resources. It
is available at:

    https://kvm.tacc.chameleoncloud.org

This section provides an overview of features available on the GUI for the bare
metal sites at the Texas Advanced Computing Center (|CHI@TACC|) and the
University of Chicago (|CHI@UC|). For information about *OpenStack KVM*, please
see :ref:`kvm`.

You may login to either site using your Chameleon portal username and password.

.. TODO(jason): [federation] adjust this note

.. _bare-metal-sites-independent:
.. attention::
    These two Chameleon bare metal sites---|CHI@TACC| and |CHI@UC|---**only**
    share user accounts, but snapshots, keypairs, Swift containers, Gnocchi
    metrics and other objects at each site are **independent**. For example, a
    keypair created at the CHI\@TACC site is **not** available at the CHI\@UC
    site. In addition, the bare metal resource types vary between CHI\@TACC and
    CHI\@UC.

GUI Features
============

Upon logging in to the GUI at a Chameleon site, you will see your project's
Overview page.

.. figure:: gui/gui.png
   :alt: The Chameleon GUI

   The Chameleon GUI

.. _gui-project-menu:

Project and Site Menu
---------------------

To switch among the projects you belong to, use the project and site menu---the
dropdown on the upper left of the screen next to the Chameleon logo. You can
also use this menu to switch from one Chameleon site to another. This allows you
to easily perform multi-site experiments.

.. figure:: gui/project_dropdown.png
   :alt: Switching between projects

   Switching between projects

.. attention::
   If you switch from one site to the other, make sure you have selected the
   site that you want to use before starting an experiment.

.. _gui-user-menu:

User Menu
---------

To access user specific settings and download *OpenStack RC* files, use the user
menu---the dropdown on the upper right of the screen where you will see your
account name.

.. figure:: gui/user_dropdown.png
   :alt: The user dropdown menu

   The user dropdown menu

.. _gui-settings:

Settings
--------

In the settings menu, you can change user specific settings such as the
Timezone.

.. figure:: gui/user_settings.png
   :alt: User settings

   User settings

.. note::
   Updating your Timezone is **highly** recommended. When you make reservations
   for bare metal resources, your local time will be used. UTC is the default
   Timezone.


Help
----

The *Help* menu item will take you to this documentation site.


OpenStack RC File
-----------------

Clicking on this menu items will download a customized `RC file
<http://www.catb.org/jargon/html/R/rc-file.html>`_ for use with the OpenStack
Command Line Interface. Source the RC file using ``source`` command to configure
environment variables that allow you to easily log in using the :ref:`Command
Line Interface <cli>`. For more information about *OpenStack RC* script, please
see :ref:`cli-rc-script`.


Themes
------

You may change the GUI theme by selecting the provided menu items.


Sign Out
--------

Use the *sign out* menu item to sign out from your current site.

.. NOTE(jason): [federation] adjust this note

.. note::

   If you do not sign out manually, your session will expire in 30 minutes.


Navigating the GUI
==================

The navigation sidebar allows you to access different sections.

.. figure:: gui/sidebar.png
   :alt: The GUI sidebar

.. _gui-compute:

Compute
=======

Use *Compute* section for reserving, configuring and managing your instances.


Overview
--------

The Overview page provides a graphical summary of your project's current
resource usage.

.. figure:: gui/overview.png
   :alt: The Overview page

.. note::
	At the bare metal sites, you may launch as many instances as you like, but
	bounded by the project :ref:`Service Unit <service-units>` allocation.
	However, at the OpenStack KVM site, your project is limited to a certain
	number of virtual machines. By default, each project is allowed to allocate
	50 *Floating IP addresses* and use 10 *Security Groups*. You may request
	additional resources by submitting a ticket on the |Help Desk|.

.. _gui-compute-instances:

Instances
---------

The Instances page allows you to work with your instances. You may launch,
terminate, monitor, or reboot an instance. Clicking on the dropdown list in
*Action* column to see what you are eligible to do to your instances.

.. figure:: gui/instances.png
   :alt: The Instances page

Images
------

The Images page allows you to view, upload and edit the images. You may also use
this page to launch instance using selected images.

.. note:: You can only edit the images you own.

.. figure:: gui/images.png
   :alt: The Images page

.. tip:: Search for images using the filter bar.

.. _gui-key-pairs:

Key Pairs
---------

The Key Pairs page allows you to create, import and manage SSH key pairs
associated with your user account.

.. figure:: gui/key_pairs.png
   :alt: The Key Pairs page

.. note::

   Chameleon **only** stores the *public key* for each SSH key pair. **Do not**
   upload your *private key* to the portal! Private keys look like this:

   .. code-block::

       -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----

To delete a SSH key pair, click on the *Delete Key Pair* button in the *Action*
column. You may delete multiple key pairs by selecting them via the checkbox and
clicking the *Delete Key Pairs* button.

Creating a Key Pair
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a key pair, click the *+ Create Key Pair* button. In the prompted
dialog, provide a name for your new key pair and then click the *Create Key
Pair* button.

.. figure:: gui/create_key_pair_name.png
   :alt: Specifying a key pair name

   Specifying a key pair name

A ``.pem`` file that contains the *Private Key* should be automatically
downloaded. In addition, the *Public Key* associated with the *Private Key*
should be saved automatically to Chameleon. Clicking on the *Regenerate and
download Key Pair* button will generate a new *Public/Private Key Pair* and
initiate a new download of the *Private Key*.

.. tip::
   Save the *Private Key* to a location you will remember at your local file
   system. Your *home* directory is recommanded for macOS and Linux systems.

.. _importing-key-pair:

Importing a Key Pair
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Alternatively, you may import a key pair that you have generated on your
computer. Clicking the *Import Key Pair* button to prompt the dialog. Then,
provide a name for your imported key pair and paste the *Public Key*.

.. tip::
   The prompted dialog contains the instructions on how to generate a key pair
   using the Linux/macOS command.

.. figure:: gui/import_key_pair.png
   :alt: Importing a public key

   Importing a public key

.. tip::
   Typically, the key generated from your computer will be at
   ``~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub``. On Mac OS X, you can run in a terminal: ``cat
   ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub | pbcopy``. It copies the content of the public key to your
   copy/paste buffer. Then you can simply paste in the "Public Key" box.

.. _gui-api-access:

API Access
----------

The API Access page lists all the available REST APIs that are used for
configuring the :ref:`Command Line Interface <cli>`. In addition, you may
download :ref:`OpenStack RC <cli-rc-script>` scripts via this page.

.. NOTE(jason): [federation] update screenshot

.. figure:: gui/api_access.png
   :alt: The API Access page

   The API Access page

Network
=======

The Network section allows you to work with virtual network resources, such as
configuring routers and virtual networks. For more information, please see
:ref:`networking`.

Network Topology
----------------

The Network Topology page displays your current virtual network topology in
either the *Topology* or *Graph* formats. You may also use this section to
directly launch instances, create networks or create routers.

.. figure:: gui/network_topology.png
   :alt: The Network Topology page

   The Network Topology page

Networks
--------

The Networks page lists all the Virtual Networks of the selected project. You
may use this section to create, delete and modify Virtual Networks. Clicking on
the dropdown list (if shown) in *Action* column to see what you are eligible to
do to your virtual networks.

.. figure:: gui/networks.png
   :alt: The Networks page

   The Networks page

Routers
-------

Same as the Networks page, the Routers page allows you to work on the Routers of
the selected project.

.. figure:: gui/routers.png
   :alt: The Routers page

   The Routers page


Security Groups
---------------

Use the Security Groups page to create, delete, and modify the Security Groups
of the selected project.

.. figure:: gui/security_groups.png
   :alt: The Security Groups page

   The Security Groups page

.. attention::
   Chameleon bare metal sites - `CHI\@TACC
   <https://chi.tacc.chameleoncloud.org>`_ and `CHI\@UC
   <https://chi.uc.chameleoncloud.org>`_ - **do not** support security groups
   (i.e. all ports are open to the public).


Floating IPs
------------

The Floating IPs page allows you to work with the Floating IP addresses
allocated for the selected project, including associating with instances and
releasing back to the pool. Clicking on the dropdown list (if shown) in *Action*
column to see what you are eligible to do to your Floating IPs.

.. figure:: gui/floating_ips.png
   :alt: The Floating IPs page

   The Floating IPs page

Releasing Floating IP Addresses
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. important::
   The Chameleon Floating IP address pool is a shared and finite resource.
   **Please be responsible and release the Floating IP addresses that are not
   used, so other Chameleon users and projects can use them!**

To release a single Floating IP address,  click on the dropdown in the *Actions*
column and select *Release Floating IP* . You may also release multiple
addresses by selecting them via checkboxes and clicking the *Release Floating
IPs* button.

.. figure:: gui/releasing.png
   :alt: Releasing a Floating IP address

   Releasing a Floating IP address

Orchestration
=============

The Orchestration section allows you to work with the :ref:`Chameleon's Complex
Appliances <complex>`.


Stacks
------

A deployed complex appliance is referred to as a “stack” – just as a deployed
single appliance is typically referred to as an “instance”. The Stacks page
allows you to launch, rebuild, or terminate stacks.

.. figure:: gui/stacks.png
   :alt: The Stacks page

   The Stacks page

.. tip::
   After launching a stack, all the instances launched with the stack can be
   viewed at :ref:`Compute - Instances <gui-compute-instances>` section as well.

.. note::
   When you terminate a stack, all instances launched with the stack will be
   terminated.

Resource Types
--------------

The Resource Types page lists the currently available Orchestration Resource
Types of Chameleon. You may click on the resource types to get details. The
Orchestration Resource Types are used when writing *OpenStack Heat Orchestration
Template*. For more information about *OpenStack Heat*, please see `the
OpenStack Heat documentation <https://docs.openstack.org/heat/latest/>`_.

.. figure:: gui/resource_types.png
   :alt: The Resource Types page

   The Resource Types page

Template Versions
-----------------

The Template Versions are also used when writing *OpenStack Heat Orchestration
Template*. Clicking on the version to get supported features of the specific
version.

.. figure:: gui/template_versions.png
   :alt: The Template Versions page

   The Template Versions page

Object Store
============

The *Containers* section under *Object Store* gives an easy access to your
Chameleon object/blob store. You may create, delete, upload objects to or remove
objects from containers via this page. For more information about Chameleon
Object Store, please see :ref:`object-store`.

.. figure:: gui/containers.png
   :alt: The Containers page

   The Containers page

Reservations
============

The Reservations section allows you to manage your leases of the selected
project, including creating and deleting leases. For more information, see
:ref:`reservations`.

.. figure:: gui/leases.png
   :alt: The Leases page

   The Leases page

.. tip::
   Check *Lease Calendar*, so you can schedule your experiments efficiently.

Identity
========

The Project section under Identity allows you to check what projects you belong
to. You can set your default project by clicking the *Set as Active Project*
button in the *Actions* column.

.. figure:: gui/projects.png
   :alt: The Projets page

   The Projects page
